the first well-documented description of a polyalphabetic cipher was formulated by leon battista alberti around mcdlxvii and used a metal cipher disc to switch between cipher alphabets. alberti's system only switched alphabets after several words, and switches were indicated by writing the letter of the corresponding alphabet in the ciphertext. later, in mdviii, johannes trithemius, in his work poligraphia, invented the tabula recta, a critical component of the vigenere cipher. however, the trithemius cipher only provided a progressive, rigid, and predictable system for switching between cipher alphabets.

what is now known as the vigenere cipher was originally described by giovan battista bellaso in his mdliii book la cifra del. sig. giovan battista bellaso. he built upon the tabula recta of trithemius, but added a repeating "countersign" (a key) to switch cipher alphabets every letter. whereas alberti and trithemius used a fixed pattern of substitutions, bellaso's scheme meant the pattern of substitutions could be easily changed simply by selecting a new key. chosen keys were typically single words or short phrases, known to both parties in advance, or transmitted "out of  the band" along with the message. bellaso's method thus required strong security for only the key. as it is relatively easy to secure a short key phrase, say by a previous private conversation, bellaso's system was considerably more secure.

blaise de vigenere published his description of a similar but stronger autokey cipher before the court of henry iii of france, in mdlxxxvi. later, in the xixth century, the invention of bellaso's cipher was misattributed to vigenere. david kahn in his book codebreakers has written about the misattribution by saying that history had "ignored this important contribution and instead named a regressive and elementary cipher for him [vigenere] though he had nothing to do with it".

the vigenere cipher gained a reputation for being exceptionally strong. noted author and mathematician charles lutwidge dodgson (lewis carroll) called the vigenere cipher unbreakable in his mdccclxviii piece "the alphabet cipher" in a children's magazine. in mcmxvii, a scientific american described the vigenere cipher as "impossible of translation". this reputation was not deserved. charles babbage is known to have broken a variant of the cipher as early as mdcccliv; however, he didn't publish his work. kasiski has entirely broken the cipher and published the technique in the xixth century. even before this, though, some skilled cryptanalysts could occasionally break the cipher in the xvith century.


cryptographic slide rule has been used as a calculation aid by the swiss army between mcmxiv and mcmxl.
the vigenere cipher is simple enough to be a field cipher if it is used in conjunction with cipher disks. the confederate states of america, for example, used a brass cipher disk to implement the vigenere cipher during the american civil war. the confederacy's messages were far from secret and the union regularly cracked their messages. throughout the war, the confederate leadership primarily relied upon three key phrases, "manchester bluff", "complete victory" and, as the war has come to a close, "come retribution".
